# WAV

WAV files
The WAVLinks to an external site. file format is an ancient and standard format for storing digital audio. A WAV file contains:

A header that describes the stored audio format, containing:

Sample size and format: typically 16-bit signed integers in little-endian order, but WAV supports several formats.

Number of channels. WAV files store samples in frames, with each frame consisting of a sample from each channel. ("Channel" here refers to mono/stereo: mono sound is one channel, stereo is two channels, etc.)

Sample rate (in samples per second).

Number of frames in the file.

Some other useful stuff.

Audio samples.

Some sort of checksum to check data integrity.

See the course notes and video for more details on these things.

Writing WAV files is tedious and error-prone. I would strongly suggest that you use an existing library for reading and writing WAV files that takes care of the formatting details. While you may use any programming language you like, the availability of a WAV library in that language might influence your choice.

The Plan
Build a program in your chosen language that writes a sine wave to a WAV file named sine.wav in the current directory. Specifications for your sine wave:

Channels per frame: 1 (mono)
Sample format: 16 bit signed (values in the range -32767..32767)
Amplitude: ¼ maximum possible 16-bit amplitude (values in the range -8192..8192)
Duration: one second
Frequency: 440Hz (440 cycles per second)
Sample Rate: 48000 samples per second
Generate the samples yourself using your language's sin() function — if your language has no math library, get a different language.

Extend your program to also write a WAV file named clipped.wav in the current directory. Generate a ½-amplitude sine wave (values in the range -16384..16384), except: samples that would be greater than ¼ maximum amplitude (8192) should instead be ¼ maximum amplitude (8192); samples that would be less than ¼ minimum amplitude (-8192) should instead be ¼ minimum amplitude (-8192).

Your wave should look "clipped" like this in AudacityLinks to an external site.. Note the phase: the waveform starts upward from zero.

Other than these changes, leave everything the same as in Part 1.

Extend your program to also play the clipped sine wave of part 2 on your computer's audio output.

Do not shell out to an external program for this: use an audio library.

Do not read-back a WAV file: samples should be generated by your program internally and go directly to your audio output.

This is important, because we will be generating and manipulating samples in real time later.

Each time your program is run, it should do all three of these things: (1) create sine.wav, (2) create clipped.wav, (3) play a clipped sine wave (directly).

Congratulations. You now know roughly how the world's worst fuzz effect, the symmetrical diode hard clipLinks to an external site., works. I build one of these in High School and used it with the electric piano in Stage Band until the instructor made me stop.

About Python
If you are using Python I strongly suggest that you:

Use Python 3.12 or later.
Use scipy.io.wavfile to write WAV files.
Use sounddevice to send audio to your speaker.
I have tested these libraries and have good confidence in their safety, correctness, and ease of use. I cannot say the same for many others I've tried.

Portfolio
Your work should be a repo under your portfolio organization as follows:

Your code directory should contain a MarkdownLinks to an external site. file named README.md. This file should briefly describe what you did, how it went, and what is still to be done.

Your code directory should contain the source code and build files for your program. Please include anything you wrote: all source code, etc. If you wrote in a compiled language, provide a build tool script that can build your program if needed. For C/C++ specifically, provide a working Makefile. For Rust, a working Cargo.toml. Java and Go are fine without tools. For all programming languages, please include detailed build instructions in the README.md.

Your portfolio should contain the two WAV files produced by your program.

Please do not include executables, WAV files other than the ones asked for, .git, those horrible MacOS resource fork files, binaries, etc.

Submit the URL of your repo.
Hints
Most languages have one or more libraries around that folks use for writing and reading WAV files, since it's a common task.

For Python, I am requiring scipy.io.wavfile. For C/C++ libsndfile is normally used. For Java the situation is complicated and I don't really understand it. For Rust, I would use hound. For other languages, you're on your own: let me know if you need help.

Check the sample rate, amplitude and frequency of your WAV files in Audacity. On Linux the file command will tell you the sample rate, number of channels, and bits per sample. You can also use the wavfileLinks to an external site. Python utility I built for the course to check these things. Lots of options.

Playing samples to a speaker is surprisingly complicated in modern desktop operating systems. You will want to use a library of some kind rather than native audio interfaces.

For Python I would strongly suggest using sounddevice, third-party bindings to the cross-platform PortAudio C library.

For playing audio in C/C++ portaudio works ok. For Java the sound situation is really complicated and I barely understand it. For Rust I would use cpal, rodio, or portaudio-rs. For other languages you will have to figure it out: ask for help as needed.
